[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: Hello.
My name's Gregg
Braden and I'd like
to welcome you to this
very special presentation
of "Missing Links: Simulation
by Design: Are We Living
in a Virtual Reality?"
In the last episode,
we went beyond asking
what if to this question,
with the studies
now showing that
it's more likely
than not that we are
living in a simulation.
The question now becomes, why?
What are we learning?
Well, the clue to our
answer is in plain sight
of everyday life; in the
biology of life itself
and our ability to
self-regulate our own bodies.
In this episode, let's
explore these ideas--
who built our simulation,
what are we learning
from this cosmic program?
There are two schools
of thought when
it comes to the beginning of our
universe and our place in it.
The first school
of thought suggests
that we are the product of
an unimaginably lucky series
of events where just the
right conditions appeared
in just the right way
at just the right time
to create the perfect
environment to form
the perfect atoms that combined
in just the right proportions
to form the first elements
that gave birth to the very
first DNA molecule of life.
Mathematician Chandra
Wickramasinghe says the odds
of this happening--
the mathematical odds--
are about 1 in 10 to 40,000th.
So just to be clear, that's a
one with 40,000 zeros after it.
Just to give you some idea
of how absurd these odds are
that this could have
happened purely by chance,
scientists generally
agree that when
the odds of something
happening are 1 to 10
in the 110th or more,
that we say that something
is pretty much impossible.
So now we're talking about
one to the 40,000ths.
But for the non-mathematician,
astronomer Fred Hoyle
offers another
analogy that I love.
He said, the odds of
life forming randomly--
of the first DNA molecule
forming completely randomly
under natural
conditions-- he said,
those odds are the
equivalent of a tornado
sweeping through a junkyard
and assembling a Boeing 747
jetliner from the
scattered debris.
Well, I think we can all
agree that this is probably
never going to happen, that's
how steep those odds are.
And that's why we look to
the second possibility.
The second possibility
suggests that we
are the product of an
ancient simulation,
a computerized virtual reality
that was set into motion long
ago in our ancient past as the
cosmic machinery that churns
out information and
energy, the ones
and zeros, the
elements of the atoms
that make our physical
reality a possibility.
It's a process that's continuing
today right this moment.
MIT Physicist Seth Lloyd
supported this idea in a book
that he wrote in 2006 entitled
"Programming the Universe."
He suggested that
the universe itself
is one big quantum computer
producing what we see around
us, and us, as it runs this
massive computer program.
So regardless of which
idea turns out to be true--
whether or not we are, in
fact, the product of this
unimaginably lucky series of
events or if we are the product
of a simulation an
intentional virtual reality--
the questions that we're
trying to answer right now
are still the same two big ones.
First question, who
built this simulation?
Who could have started
something like this
long ago in our ancient
past, number one?
Number two, what are we
learning in this cosmic program?
Are we here just for fun?
Is this an amusement
and entertainment,
or is there a need--
as we mentioned in
previous episodes--
is there a possibility that
we are immersing ourselves
into an environment to learn a
way of being here in this world
that we need because we're
going somewhere else where
those skills and
that way of being
is going to be a necessity?
Well, let's explore
both of these.
A clue as to who
built our simulation
can be found from
asking ourselves, who
benefits from the simulation?
Well, as in any
simulation, those
who are actually
experiencing the simulation
are the ones that
are benefiting.
And that means
that you and me, we
are benefiting from
this simulation.
Is it possible that we're
the ones that built it?
Is it possible that
we are the product
of an advanced civilization
that has, in fact, lived
through some of the
scenarios that we've
talked about earlier
in these programs
and that we are the
pioneers, that we are
the explorers, that
we are the ones that
have immersed ourselves into
this alternate reality--
temporarily the
Maya, the illusion--
so that we can
learn a way of being
and share that way
of being with others
here because we're going
somewhere where we're going
to need this way of being?
Well, when we think about
the idea of a simulation,
this answer becomes even clearer
as we examine our relationship
to our physical reality.
We know, as we
mentioned previously,
that there's a field of energy
that connects all things.
We know that.
We also know that we
are part of that field.
We know that human
DNA actually interacts
with the photons of atoms, the
stuff this world is made of.
And we know that
human emotion changes
the DNA that changes the
stuff this world is made of.
It means that we are immersed
in an interactive reality where
the choices that we
make in our lives--
the choices of our emotions, of
our feelings, of our thoughts,
of our beliefs--
are changing our biology.
They're changing our
chemistry and allowing
us to interact and change
the chemistry of the field
that we find
ourselves immersed in.
So we ask ourselves the
question, what are we learning?
We must assume that
whatever we're learning
has something to do with
this deep relationship
that we have with our
reality with our ability
to self-regulate
ourselves from within so
that we can experience the
results of that self-regulation
in the world around us.
Maybe we're going to
a world where this
is going to be very important.
It's interesting,
scientists have
found that here
on Earth, we live
in a world of very
high magnetic fields.
There's a very strong magnetic
field that surrounds the Earth
and there is a very
powerful magnetic field
within your body--
two of them, actually.
One of them is in the brain
and the second is in the heart.
And the heart is the
strongest magnetic field
in the human body.
Well, the reason I'm saying
this is because what we now know
is that magnetic field
produces a lag in the time
that we have an
experience and when
we see that experience
reflected either in our bodies
or in the outer world.
The magnetic field
creates a lag time
that gives us the
opportunity to really think
about the choices we
make, about the emotions
that we're creating,
to hone those choices
before they become a reality
in our world and in our bodies.
So it suggests that maybe--
maybe-- we're going
find ourselves
at some future time in a world
where that magnetic field is
not so strong, where our
choices become reality almost
instantaneously; where our
thoughts, feelings, emotions,
and beliefs manifest
almost immediately.
And if that's the case,
it would make sense
that we're learning to master
the consequences of our choices
now, in this world, in a
relatively safe environment.
Can you imagine what would your
life look like if every fantasy
that you have; if every
passing thought, feeling,
and emotion suddenly
became manifest?
I think you can agree
that all of our lives
would look very different
than they look today.
So this relationship
between the biology
of our bodies and
the physical world
strongly suggests that whatever
it is that we're learning
has to do with our mastery
of our inner technology
and its relationship
to the world around us.
So these relationships
make even more sense
when we begin to consider
them within the context
of the mystical teachings of the
past, the spiritual traditions
that have always told us that
there is a power within us
to change the conditions
not only of our bodies,
but of our relationship
to the physical world.
And it's these abilities,
this human potential,
that has been the
core of the mysteries
and the secrets that were
preserved in the monasteries,
in the nunneries,
in the teachings
of the shamans and the
healers and the curanderos
throughout the world.
I've had the opportunity
to experience
precisely these kinds
of teachings personally,
and I'd like to take
just a few moments
to share with you an
example of exactly what it
is that I mean here.
In the 1990s, I had a
number of opportunities
to visit the monasteries
and nunneries
in the highlands of central
China on the Tibetan Plateau.
And at that time, Tibet
was very accessible to me.
12 monasteries and
two nunneries and some
of the most mystical
caves of the yogis
preserving the wisdom and
the teachings of those
who have come before us.
So it was in these places
where I had the opportunity
to see something that I have
studied since my childhood.
It is the dwelling of an
ancient yogi, a mystical yogi.
His name was Milarepa.
His full name was
Jetsun Milarepa.
And he lived between
the years 1052 and 1135.
Let me tell you a little
bit about Milarepa's life
and it will help to
understand what it is
that he left in his teaching.
Milarepa came from
a privileged family.
His parents were wealthy,
his life was relatively easy.
He studied the mystical arts
because he had the opportunity
to do precisely that.
And it was during
his youth that there
was a battle between his village
and a neighboring village.
And his entire family was
killed in this battle.
His village was destroyed,
all of his friends,
his neighbors, everyone that
he had known were killed.
And he survived and became
enraged from within.
And he channeled his
rage into revenge.
He used what he knew of the
mystical arts to exact revenge
upon those who had taken the
lives of everyone that he knew.
He went and he took
many lives himself.
He killed the people
responsible for killing
his family, killed the people
responsible for destroying
his village.
And immediately, he knew
that what he had done
was not honoring the
mystical teachings as they
had been shared with him and he
felt very remorseful for what
he had done.
It was in that moment
that Milarepa renounced
his physical possessions.
He left the world
of comfort and he
went to a cave high in
the mountains of Tibet
to reconcile his
emotions, the guilt
that he felt for taking so
many human lives in retribution
for the loss of his
family and his loved ones.
He vowed in that moment to
stay in a cave of seclusion
and to spend the
rest of his life
honing his skills
only for good things.
He would no longer use his
abilities to hurt other people.
For the rest of
his life, Milarepa
lived in a series of caves
high in the Tibetan Plateau.
And the writings of those
who had the opportunity
to spend time with him
describe his condition
in very graphic terms.
They say he ate only the nettles
that grew near the caves.
They were very high
and chlorophyll.
The diet of 100% chlorophyll
turned his body green.
His skin turned green,
his hair turned green.
His clothing became
tattered and his hair
grew down to his waist.
And they say he was a
very frightening sight
to see this man with green
skin, green teeth, green hair,
and tattered clothing come
to the mouth of the cave
when visitors would go there.
But the point that
the story is this,
Milarepa mastered his inner
potential and the ability
to use it for good things.
And there were
students that would
come to him who wanted to learn
what it is that he had learned.
And Milarepa would use the
opportunity of this cave
to demonstrate something
for his students
that has great relevance in
what we're talking about here.
When pilgrims visit
Milarepa's cave today,
they see the remnants
of his teachings
that he offered to his students
and they see the remnants
on the ceiling of the cave
walls just as you're seeing
on your screen right now.
There are pilgrims
that come to pay homage
to Milarepa's teaching, but
there are students who come
and they literally
will place their hands
at very specific
places on the walls
and on the ceilings of the cave.
These are not random places.
Because what they
are doing is they
are placing their hands
precisely in the place
that Milarepa placed his.
Here's the reason why.
What Milarepa demonstrated
for his students
was that he would place his
hand against the physical wall
of the cave.
He would close his eyes,
take a deep breath.
He would create an
inner experience
within his body that
changed his relationship
with his physical world.
And to demonstrate that, as he
touched the rock of the cave,
he would continue
to press his hand
and his hand would
continue to move
into the ceiling of the cave
as if the rock did not exist.
What Milarepa was
doing was transcending
the limits of his
physical reality,
and he was doing
it by regulating
his inner technology.
When he felt the feelings, when
he created this inner condition
of being able to move his
hand through that rock,
the walls of the cave
were no longer boundaries
to his experience.
He was no longer limited by
the physical walls of the cave.
And as he demonstrated
this for his students,
what he showed his students
was that they are only
limited in their lives.
They're only bound in
their physical world
as long as their beliefs
create that boundary.
And by seeing Milarepa
transcend these limits,
it freed the inner
beliefs of his students
to do the same for themselves.
And I want you to
know the reason why.
It's because this ties
precisely into what we're
learning in our simulation.
How do we relate to
the laws of physics?
How do we relate to the laws
of our physical reality?
What is our inner potential to
actually transcend the limits
that we perceive in our
world and what might that
mean in the world
that we're going
to as we learn of our greatest
potential in this simulation?
So when we think about what
Milarepa showed his students
on the walls of
that cave, I want
to tell you I went
there myself personally
because I wanted to see the
legacy that Milarepa had left.
I physically placed my
hands into the impressions
that he left, multiple
impressions, in that cave wall.
Some of them came all
the way up to my mid-arm.
And my hands fit perfectly
into those imprints.
I'm absolutely certain
that this is not a hoax,
that this rock actually changed
its consistency in the presence
of this man's physical body
as a result of something
that he changed within himself.
So when we see something
like this, the question is,
is it a miracle or
is it a technology?
Well, the answer
to this question
depends upon you and how
you think of yourself.
What is your story?
What is your story that you
tell yourself and believe
about your relationship
to the world?
Do you believe that you are
limited in your experience,
that you live in a world
of separation, competition,
conflict where you are separate
from your physical reality,
where you're separate
from your own body
and powerless over
any circumstances
or conditions in your life?
Or do you believe that you live
in a world that is connected,
that is unified,
that you are part of
rather than separate from
the world that you see
and because of that, as
you change in yourself
from within that you can full
well expect those changes to be
reflected and mirrored
in your physical reality
in the world around you?
Well, your answer
to the question
determines the
answer as to whether
or not what Milarepa
showed us is
a miracle or a
technology helping
us to remember the potential
that lives within each of us.
Well, our own science
now is beginning
to reveal relationships
within our bodies
in just the last
few years that help
us to give credence to
what Milarepa showed us.
I want to share two recent
discoveries with you.
These discoveries are
so recent they're rarely
taught in textbooks and in the
classrooms on the one hand.
And on the other hand, they are
based in peer-reviewed science
and they tell us
something about ourselves,
and that something
changes the way
we think of ourselves and our
relationship to the world.
Now, the first of
these discoveries I
talked about in greater detail
in the first season of "Missing
Links."
In 1991, scientists discovered
approximately 40,000
specialized cells concentrated
within every human heart
in a way that simply had not
been recognized previously.
They're called sensory
neurites, which
is a little bit of a
technical-sounding word.
They're essentially
brain-like cells,
but they're not in the
brain, they're in the heart.
They are concentrated
in such a way
that they're actually called
the little brain in the heart.
And these cells literally
think independently
of the cells in our brain.
They feel and they
remember independently
of the neurons in our brain.
So what we're talking about are
two separate organs, the brain
and the heart.
However, we also know that
there is the potential
to harmonize the
heart and the brain
into a single potent system,
to harmonize the heart
and the brain through what we
call heart-brain coherence.
And when we do that, we change
our relationship to our bodies,
we change our relationship
to our physical world.
For example, when we harmonize
the heart and the brain,
we open the doorway
to self-regulation
of some of the most mystical
systems within the human body.
We open the door to
the self-regulation
of deep intuition, for example,
on demand, deep intuition when
we choose to have it, rather
than waiting for the universe
to simply surprise us
with spontaneous intuition
at different times in our lives.
We've all experienced
spontaneous intuition.
When you pick up the
telephone to call someone
that you care about and
they're already on the phone
before you dial
that number, that's
an example of
spontaneous intuition.
You had that
experience, and I know
we've all had this
from time to time,
and we say, that was really
interesting, that was cool.
Can I do it again?
This is the key.
Can I do it again because
I choose to do it,
or must I wait for the
universe to simply give me
that experience
whenever it happens
to give me the experience?
Well, the answer
to that question
hinges upon our ability to
self-regulate our intuition.
We pick up that
phone to call someone
and they're already there,
that is a form of intuition.
We had an inner sense to walk
over, pick up that receiver--
or cell phone these days--
and dial that number.
We had the intuition
possibly subconsciously
and we followed it.
If we had consciously
chosen to do the same thing,
we probably would never
make that connection
because the intuition is what
connects us with other people.
So we harmonize the
heart and the brain,
we open the door to deep
intuition on demand,
when we choose because we
choose to have that experience.
We open the door to
deep experiences,
direct access to the
subconscious, for example.
We harmonize the
heart and the brain.
That's a hotline to
the subconscious,
and that's important to you
and to me for this reason--
if we ever choose to
change an unhealthy pattern
from our childhood,
from our parents,
from our caregivers
when we were young,
those deeply embedded
subconscious patterns,
we must communicate with the
subconscious in a language
that it recognizes.
It's not enough to say
a verbal affirmation
a million times if the
subconscious does not
register that affirmation.
Harmonizing the
heart and the brain,
it's a hotline directly
to the subconscious.
Extraordinary states of
super learning, precognition,
knowing when things are going
to happen before they're
happening-- these
are all examples
of what happens
when we harmonize
the heart and the brain.
So it's through these
experiences of self-regulation,
choosing to harmonize
the heart and the brain,
that we trigger these
states, as well as
extraordinary states of health.
When we harmonize the
heart and the brain,
it is a catalyst for over 1,300
positive biochemical reactions
in your body--
a powerful immune
response, the release
of anti-aging enzymes for
extraordinary longevity.
So it's healthy.
Even if you're not into
deep intuition or access
to the subconscious, it's
a really healthy thing
to do to harmonize the
heart and the brain.
Resilience to life
stress and life
change-- our world is changing.
Your world is changing,
my world is changing.
We've got to find a way to be
resilient to this tremendous
amount of change.
Our bodies can do it if we
tune and harmonize our bodies
with the world.
Heart-brain coherence helps
us to do precisely that.
So this discovery of
these 40,000 neurites
in the heart and the
ability to harmonize
the heart and the brain,
it changes everything,
the way we think about
ourselves and our body,
and that's just the
first discovery.
The second discovery, this is
even more fascinating for me.
It is a discovery that
was made in the year 2004
by Italian scientists,
and it is the discovery
of what are called mirror
neurons in the brain,
in the neocortex of the brain--
very specific places
in the neocortex
is where these specialized
cells are found.
Now, what is a mirror neuron?
You'll love this.
A mirror neuron is
a specialized neuron
that fires both when
we have an experience
and it also fires when
we witness the experience
even though we're not really
having the experience.
Think about what that means.
It means that when
we watch something--
this is why sports
is so powerful.
We can lie on the couch
on a Sunday afternoon
and watch a football game.
We're lying down.
Our hearts are racing, our
bodies may be perspiring,
we are agitated, we're excited.
But we're not even moving.
Because our mirror
neuron does not
know the difference
between us watching
and having the experience.
This plays a very powerful
role in the way we learn.
And I'm sharing this
with you right now
because mirror neurons
play a very powerful role
in what Milarepa was
showing to his students.
When his students
witnessed him doing
what was believed
to be impossible,
their mirror neurons
fired as if they
were having their experience
and their brain did not
know the difference between
watching and experiencing.
This is what frees us.
When we see a miracle
happen with someone else,
it frees us to allow that
possibility within ourselves.
These two discoveries-- 40,000
neurites in the human heart
and the sensory neurites and
our ability to learn through
witnessing--
these two discoveries
together change
everything we've been led to
believe about our relationship
to our physical reality.
And in our simulation in this
virtual world that we live in,
what could be more
important than learning
to physically interact
with our world
on demand, when we choose,
in the way and the time
that we choose to do so?
Wow.
This is an awesome--
an awesome--
new series of
discoveries that empower
us to feel that we are part of,
rather than separate from, that
empowers to
participate, rather than
be victims, of what
we see happening
in our lives and our world.
So with these ideas
in mind, the ideas
that we are biologically
wired to interact
with our physical
reality and that we
can change our physical
reality by changing
our biology, these two very
powerful ideas in mind,
let's go back into
one of our most
cherished and ancient
spiritual traditions,
a tradition that
was actually edited
from the modern biblical
canon in the fourth century
during the time of the
Emperor Constantine,
when we know over
40 biblical books
were either completely
taken out or they
were edited and
rearranged and condensed
into what we know as the modern
Bible, today the New Testament.
And what we find is that the
instructions for us relating
to our physical
reality in just the way
that I've described to
you were left for us
in this ancient
text before it was
edited in the fourth century.
In the fourth century,
the Emperor Constantine
held a council, the
Council of Nicea.
And in that council,
there was an effort
to streamline and modernize what
was then a collection of texts.
And among the texts
that were edited
was a biblical book that is
called the Gospel of Thomas.
Now, we know about
these books because they
have been rediscovered
in the mid-20th century
in a little village in
Egypt along the Nile River.
The name of the village
is called Nag Hammadi.
And the collection of texts
are now called the Nag Hammadi
texts, the Nag Hammadi library.
And it is in this
Nag Hammadi library
that we find the original
versions of the texts that
were edited and that's how we
know that they were taken away.
In the Gospel of Thomas,
there is a very, very precise
passage.
And it is also reflected in
the authorized King James
version of the Book of John.
So if you're looking at the
modern Bible, John 16:23-24.
And I know you're familiar with
this text, the edited version
that was lost in the translation
where the original meaning was
lost.
You've all heard
this before, ask
and he shall receive that
your joy may be full.
I heard that when I was a kid.
People around me said, I
ask and ask all the time
and nothing ever happens.
Why is that?
Well, if this is true
for you, the answer
may be because we received
in our biblical traditions
the condensed version.
And you've heard the
phrase that something
is lost in
translation, and that's
precisely what
happened in this text.
If we go back to the original
Aramaic text before the edits,
it reads similar but
with key differences.
Here's what I mean.
In the original
texts, the Aramaic
translates to ask
without hidden motive
and be surrounded
by your answer,
be enveloped by what you desire.
And those are the key words, be.
If you are being
surrounded by your answer,
if you are being enveloped
by what you desire,
it means that you are having
the emotional experience
as if those things
are already present.
And this is a very,
very powerful concept.
There is a huge
difference between working
toward an outcome and
beginning as if that outcome is
already present.
Think about this.
Think about it for
your own healing,
think about it for
your own relationships,
think about it for the
abundance in your life.
If you are asking for
them to be present,
it means they are
not present now.
If you are giving thanks
for what already exists,
you are claiming that it
is present in this moment.
You are changing the
biology of your body,
you are changing the
chemistry of your body
as it interacts with
your physical environment
so that that reality
may be present.
Remember, the field is
a mirror or for what
we claim to be true within.
In a simulation, what could be
more powerful than the ability
to think, feel, and
emote our true desires,
our true wishes as
if they have already
happened, rather than asking
for them to come to pass?
Where did we learn to focus
on what we don't have?
Where did you learn
to focus on what
is not present in your life?
Turn that around.
Just a little shift
in thinking and you
are now working with
a quantum principle.
Quantum thinking begins
with the outcome.
This is what was left for us in
our most ancient and cherished
spiritual traditions.
It's what's taught
in the monasteries,
in the nunneries, the healers,
the curanderos, the mystics,
the shamans.
It's what was left for us
by the yogis in the past,
it's what Milarepa was
showing to his students.
And in a simulated
environment, this
is where you find your
power in interacting
with that simulation
consciously,
intentionally, on demand.
Now that we
understand the secret
to our relationship
with our own bodies
and the extraordinary
potential that we
have to self-regulate, let's
take these understandings
beyond our bodies,
into the rhythms
and the cycles of nature
and the world around us.
In the next episode, we'll
discover the elegant yet simple
code that forms the patterns
we see all around us
as nature and everything
in the natural world,
from rocks and trees
and plants and mountains
and rivers to the most intimate
relationships in our lives
and the universe as
we know it today.
Thank you for joining
me and be sure to tune
in for the next all new episode
of "Missing Links: Simulation
by Design: Are We Living
in a Virtual Reality?"
[THEME MUSIC]